[Music]
well time traveler stock your backpack
with your favorite hygiene essentials
because we're living in the best time
ever for cleanliness
don't forget your toothpaste some
ancient civilizations
used a mixture of gum arabic and soot to
keep their teeth clean
that or a mix of salt mint iris flour
and pepper
when dennis tried this combo to see how
it works let's just say
it didn't feel good on the gums about
five thousand years ago
people in egypt and greece would fray a
small twig
to clean in between their teeth a few
centuries later
soap appeared yay it was a mix of boiled
fat
and ash oh in such hot climates
people would wash their bodies up to
four times a day using
soda ash to get rid of dirt a big leap
forward when ancient romans invented the
first house water supply
it wasn't perfect by far the water was
often stagnant because it was stored in
large tanks
but romans are better known for their
bath houses
bathing though wasn't just to keep clean
it was a social activity
business people would seal their deals
in a lavish bath
oh yeah they were famous for their
public restrooms too
toilets made from stone slabs with
holes in the center all lined up
together with no
privacy dividers people would come there
to do their business
and do their business to make cleanup
easier the romans would fix a sponge at
the end of a stick
the sponge was usually soaked in a
container filled with vinegar or salty
water
and they'd share it amongst themselves
ew
this community sponge wasn't the first
thing ever used for cleanup
depending on the region ancient people
reach for stones
seashells and even sticks
the first record of paper being used for
hygienic purposes
didn't come along until the 6th century
in china
already by the 14th century china was
producing 10 million packages of toilet
paper a year
get this the ancient romans clean their
ears with q-tips
only theirs were made of metal they also
removed body hair with tweezers
that look pretty much identical to the
ones we have today
other civilizations would use threads
for that purpose a hair removing
technique still found in salons today
hey if it ain't broke ancient greeks
took
freezing cold baths they'd only stay in
there for a few minutes
and it was mostly for aesthetic reasons
not cleanliness
later on they switched to hot baths to
clean their bodies
they'd use blocks of sand nice scrub
clay ashes and even pumice that's
volcanic rock
another option was to put oil all over
their bodies
and then scrape it off along with the
dirt it caught with a special metal tool
bath houses in ancient china were a lot
like today's spas
besides baths they also provided nail
trimming massages
and even tea with snacks instead of
toothpaste
they didn't have it back then they'd
gnaw on small aromatic twigs to freshen
up the breath
the chinese were the first to invent the
actual toothbrush in the 15th century
it was made of wild boar bristles
attached to a bamboo stick
those boar hair bristles wouldn't get
replaced with nylon
until 1938 in medieval britain
a time in human history not exactly
revered for good hygiene
people would rinse their mouth with
water or a mix of vinegar
and mint herbal infusions and floral
water were an option too
they cleaned the teeth with a cloth by
just rubbing the dirt off
medieval toilets weren't much different
from what they had in ancient rome
a stone slab or a wood plank with a hole
in the center
but at least you had some privacy now
and we finally moved on from sticks and
stones to grass and hay
for cleanup those loose didn't exactly
smell like roses
open windows were a must in some castles
they'd cover the floor with flowers and
fragrant herbs to
mask the odor and no need to flush the
commodes in medieval castles look more
like elevators
but there was only one thing going one
direction in that chute
look out below in the 16th century
bathing wasn't considered important not
even for royalty
let alone commenters queen elizabeth the
first would bathe only once a month
her successor james the first supposedly
never bathed a day in his whole life
but at the very end of the century we
did get the invention of flush toilets
it takes over 250 years for them to
become commonplace
people in 17th century france found an
easy way to escape
bathing the trick was to change their
linen shirts
often to keep their bodies fresh they
also believe linen could absorb toxins
from the body
fast forward to the 1800s and the world
finally gets shampoo
though people in india had been using it
since ancient times
they'd massage their scalps with an
infusion of soap berries
gooseberry hibiscus and lots of other
hair friendly herbs
they call this process shampoo and in
the early 19th century
it made its way across the globe bathing
in the victorian area
wasn't pleasant at all it used to be
extremely cold
especially in winter if you rubbed a
cloth soaked in warm water on your feet
face pits and other strategically
important bits at least once a day
it was considered enough doing laundry
was even more of a chore in victorian
times
they'd soak stained clothes for half an
hour in milk or rub
butter on it depending on the type of
stain then
they let it all soak overnight in a
mixture of ammonium and washing soda
they get up at least two hours early the
following laundry day
around four a.m or even earlier with a
lot of work ahead of them
you take a big tub full of steaming hot
soapy water
and something called a dolly that acted
as the agitator your modern day washer
has
over in america people still weren't
fans of bathing in the 19th century
they believe that regular baths could
lead to weakness and bad health
but the main problem then was the lack
of indoor plumbing
the culture of regular bathing emerged
there in the mid 19th century
with the development of water supply
systems the 1850s
are also around the time when americans
got their bathtubs and toilet paper
but back then tp was called medicated
paper for the water closet
it was sold in large packages of 500
sheets
and cost 50 cents about 15 bucks by
today's rate
which only begs the question what did
americans use to clean up before the
mid-19th century
well leaves newspapers magazines and
corn cobs true story but the real
hygiene boom
came with regular hand washing thanks to
the discovery of germs
before that people thought contagion
spread with bad air
victorians kept their windows closed to
keep this bad air from getting in
in the mid to late 19th century hand
washing was something only doctors and
surgeons would do
it would take over a hundred years to
become commonplace among the public
that's the 1980s tp
used to come in an assortment of
different colors but today
there's practically no colored toilet
paper in the u.s at all
dying here we mean coloring not the
stoppage of heartbeats
involves chemical colorants that may not
be good for
that particular area and the whole
colorful production
turned out to be too pricey to dye the
paper
you first have to bleach it so today we
mainly have
plain old white teepee toothpaste
changed a lot just within the last
century too
if you brushed your teeth with early
20th century toothpaste
it'd leave a weird soapy aftertaste in
your mouth
yep it contained soap up until the 1940s
it made the pace smooth but it's since
been replaced with
sodium lauryl sulfate better known as
sls
with the 20th century we got yet another
innovation
in personal hygiene wet wipes yahoo
most people today believe they were
invented for the sole purpose of
cleaning yourself in the bathroom
but that's not true the first products
of this kind created in the 50s
were made to keep your hands clean on
the go